Welcome back.
So now that we've learned a little bit about optimizing our database tables for faster queries by adding
indexes, I want to model another concept that sets the table and as a class so that we can see another
way that we can create tables with at least one key index included right from the start.
All right.
So turning back to scroll, SQL Client will go back into the Aliases tab and then back into the People
Test table, and I will connect to it.
All right.
So if you recall some of the additional columns that exist in our five million road test data set,
there were a few address related columns that I intentionally decided not to deal with while we were
initially loading this data.
Let's go back to the sample data in our spreadsheet.
Just as a quick reminder.
OK, so here we are back in our spreadsheet and if I scroll towards the right, yeah, we've got a few
other fields here.
We've got a place name county, city, state and zip and even a region.
Now we don't have a street address that's just not included in this particular test data set, but we've
got these other columns here.
Now, we certainly could have just added fields in our Java class and in our people table to hold this
information.
But I wanted to show some alternative ways of dealing with data.
I don't want to get into much to whether or not one way is better or worse than the other right now.
But I do want to show you that it can be somewhat common to separate out certain related fields from
others.
So in this case, we've got one two three four five six, I think six columns here that are all related
to location or address essentially out of all of these fields here.
And it's very common that you might not want to have one table with all of those columns in it in the
database, and you might want to just separate them out, but you may want to still link them somehow.
And so we'll see how to do that in subsequent lessons.
But for now, the main thing I want to focus on is modeling a table that will allow us to hold this
location data separately.
OK, so let's see if we've got place name county, city, state, zip region.
OK, so let's jump back over to squirrel.
And we will create another table.
So we can do a create table, give it a name.
And I'm inclined to just call it addresses and then parentheses, and then we can start naming the columns
and the data types for each column.
So let's see, we've got a place name.
So the first column that I would like this table to have and I usually like to have this column in most
tables, though, there can be certain exceptions that I'll try to mention.
Here will be the ID column.
This ID column just gives us a really convenient shorthand way to refer to any particular record in
a database.
So I'm going to call it ID, but this time we're going to create this slightly differently from when
we created the people table, when we created the people table.
In fact, let me just remind you of exactly how we created the people table.
So we did a create table people and then I.D., a data type big event.
And then we use this auto underscore increment keyword here to specify that we wanted this ID column
to automatically be numbered for us.
And then we moved on with the rest of our fields, which I won't finish this up.
But you know, we did a bar car 255 and then all of the other fields, OK?
The main thing I wanted to remind you of, though, was that we did create an ID field, obviously for
the people table, and we specified its data type as big end.
And then we specified that it should auto increments for this address table, though we're going to
do things in a way that I would say is a little bit more typical, probably.
And what I mean by that is since I specified that we want an ID column here, and we now know that ideally,
if we're going to be looking up records by a column like ID, ideally we would prefer to have that column
have an index generated for it.
Well, we can actually have that index generated automatically upon creation of this table, depending
on how we define the ID column.
And it is very common to have a column on a table that is usually called something like ID, and that
ID column will typically be used as a quick way to just access one record out of all the records in
that table.
More often than not, when you see a table that is defined in this way, that ID column will usually
be set up as what is called a primary key field, and that term means what it sounds like.
It means that primary key field is a very convenient identifier for records in that table.
And if you tell the database that that column of that table is the primary key column, you'll usually
get a number of features for free.
So one of those features will be an index being generated for that column for you.
Another feature will be what's called a unique constraint.
And in short, a unique constraint just ensures that when we insert new records into that table, the
IDs for each of those records has to be unique among the records.
So in other words, if our ID column is going to hold numbers one through, you know, five million,
for example, no two or more rows can have the same ID.
And just think about it, that makes sense, right?
If they have the same ID, then it's harder to specify quickly which row you're trying to query for
or work on.
So we can get indexes for free, we can get unique constraints for free.
Some databases may offer various other features as well, but those are two really important ones that
are quite typical for a primary key field.
Other fields, by the way, can also have these unique constraints in other types of constraints as
well.
But you tend to get those for free with a primary key field.
All right, so let's make this ID field a primary field, and to do that, it's not that hard.
I do want to show you as we're creating this, how I myself know what keywords to enter here.
I don't actually have this memorized.
This isn't something I do very frequently in any database.
So let me show you what I do.
OK, so here I've got a web browser open to the H2 Databases website, and for H2 now, it's going to
be a little different for every database.
But for H2, if I want to create a primary key field, what I can do is I can come down here two commands
under the under reference and I do have a general idea of where I'm going with this.
So, you know, so hopefully after you've taken my course, you also will have enough of an idea that
you can find your way towards what you're looking for.
OK.
So I know that I'm creating a table so I can come down to the commands for creating what is called a
data definition.
That's where you can define your data tables and things.
OK.
And I can look for create a table which is right here so I can click on that.
And now this is showing me based.
Quickly, the syntax of the Create Table Command.
OK.
So each of these little sections here is a section that may or may not be necessary for the whole entire
statement that you're going to build in this case to create a table.
OK, so you've got to start with create and then the rest of these bits here are optional.
The way I know that they're optional is that there's this line that goes straight through, which is
telling me that I could start with create.
And then nothing else for this part of the command.
And then I'd have to come down to the next bit table.
Or I could optionally say create and then add either cached or memory, but not both.
That's why this this is branching off into these two bits like this.
You can do cached or memory, but not both.
And then from there you can have nothing.
Or you could specify temp.
But if you specify temp, you cannot additionally specify temporary, low, global or local, OK.
So each of these branches is exclusive.
You can only pick one of these branches ever.
OK.
So create.
And in my case, I don't want any of these other things at this time.
So if I follow this line through, then that takes me down to the next bit, which is table.
I do need the keyword table, so that is mandatory.
If not exists, is a really useful little segment of a command here because sometimes we will issue
these commands in the form of a script.
And that script at the time of writing may not know whether or not you already may have these tables
or other database objects as they are called existing in the database.
So you can use these keywords like, if not exists, to say, go ahead and make this table if it doesn't
already exist, but if it does, then don't do anything.
All right.
So I don't need that.
In this particular case, though, it wouldn't hurt for me to add it in.
So table and then a table name and I could click on this and see what are all the rules of how to create
a table name, but I'm not worried about that right now.
So we've got create table addresses so far.
Then next, I could specify nothing for the next bit and then go down to the subsequent bits and really
everything else could be optional.
Of course, though, in our case, just specifying the table name and nothing else isn't very useful.
So on the next bit here, I would branch down to where we start off with a an opening parentheses,
which we have here and then either a column name or a table constraint definition.
In our case, we want a column name, which in our case is the column ID so far and then a column definition.
And that's where we actually are right now.
Right.
I stopped right there at the ID.
So if I click on this column definition, we can see what our additional options here.
So the first one is not really optional.
It's a data type or domain.
So I can click on data type to see what are my options there, and I can even drill in further and see
data type, and I can use a predefined type or an array type or a road type.
So here are the predefined types.
There are various types of character types and binaries and Boolean since small lens and integers and
big end types.
So if I click on this begin to type, for example, then I get to see here, OK?
There's a big end.
So this is just showing how you don't have to necessarily memorize what are all the types and all the
syntax and everything.
You can drill into this syntax tree essentially to see what are all the different things that you can
specify to build up a command.
Now it really helps, obviously, if you have a general understanding, though, of what these commands
would typically look like.
Otherwise, it might take you forever to figure out how to do even the most basic thing.
All right, so I'm going to back out a few here.
All right.
So I'm back on the column definition, so I am going to have a data type of big event.
So that's this bit here, data type or domain?
I won't specify visible or invisible.
Then the next bit here I can specify a number of these options here.
And one of these I am actually interested in, which is generated always as identity.
So that allows me to tell the database that I want that column to be generated all the time.
That is largely equivalent to using this auto increment keyword that we used here when we originally
created the people table.
So I can specify generated always as identity.
Now this as identity business here just lets me specify that this column is an identity column.
In other words, all of the data in that row can be identified by this ID column that we are defining.
And you can come down here and read a bit more about what all of this means and how it's going to work
and things of that sort.
All right.
So I'm going to specify that now generated.
Always as identity.
All right, and then I could finish that up, or I could branch down here to some options.
So basically, when we tell the database to auto number a column like we're doing here and like we did
with the auto increment, we can specify additional options.
In fact, I think we might have touched on that if I, if I recall correctly when we created the people
table, we might have done an altar or something.
But at any rate, we can specify things like what number to start numbering our rows from.
So by default, it'll start at one.
But we could have it start with 100 or 1000 or whatever.
Things like that.
So in this case, we don't need to specify that, but I wanted to point that out.
OK.
So let's go back.
So we won't be specifying any of this down here.
So then we can move on to these other bits here.
So on update, we won't be doing anything on update.
We won't be doing anything with default on or selectivity.
This last bit, though, we do want something from.
And so if we click on, it's called column constraint definition.
So if you click on that now, we can see some additional options here.
We could start off with nothing and then come down to this next bid, or we could specify a constraint
name def. We won't be doing that.
So we've got some exclusive options here.
And can you guess which one we may be interested in based on what I've said so far?
All right.
So if you said primary key, you'd be right.
We want this ID column to be known or specified as a primary key.
And if you come down here, the documentation even says primary key and unique require unique values.
Primary key also disallows null values and marks the column as a primary key.
So not only do the values in our primary key column, which in this case would be the ID column.
Not only do those values have to be unique, meaning there can't be duplicates across rows in the table,
but also you can't have a null value either.
And that makes sense because since it is a primary key column, it is the identifier for the column.
It would kind of be like having a person with no name.
All right.
So we will specify primary key.
Primary key, and now that's everything that I want to put on the definition of the ID column, I know
it feels like a lot, but when you get used to doing these kinds of things, then it won't feel like
quite so much.
It's taking me a longer time to explain it than it does to actually just type it in.
And now what other columns would we want in this address table?
Well, before we go, look back at the sample data.
I can tell you now that it's very common to have like an address, one field and an address, two field
or a street address field or something like that.
So let's go ahead and define something like a street address, and let's make that a bar car.
255.
And by the way, when I specify this VAR car 255, that's just the default length that I tend to make
for VAR cards, as I've stated before.
You can actually specify various things here.
I could make it one thousand twenty four or I could make it twenty five, although obviously you want
it to be long enough to make sure that you can cover every type of street address that might need to
be inserted into this table.
For now, though, 255 is fine for me.
And then maybe let's also have an address to field and I will make that also of our car.
And that would be like if you live in an apartment, you know you've got the street address, the number
in the street on address one or in this case, street address.
But then you might also need to specify Apartment 1A or whatever.
And so that would go here in the address to field.
And then we can have a city as a bar car.
And a state now, let's go look at our sample data because I don't remember if states were in there
or not.
OK.
Yes, we do have states and what I wanted to see is whether or not the states are two characters consistently
or if they were spelled out.
So they are the two character abbreviations.
So we'll model our database to accommodate this format here.
All right.
So the state can be a VAR car, too.
And then back over here and then we've got a zip code, which is a postal code for those of you who
don't live in North America.
Zip code is a postal code.
OK.
And in fact, we could even just call it postal code or postal code, whatever you want to say there,
and I'm going to go ahead and model this as of our car, even though here we we see it new as numerical
because at least in North America, postal codes actually have a more formal format, which is longer
than this with a hyphen in it.
And so I would want to just make sure that I accommodated that.
And now that's a very specific thing for me as an American who knows what postal codes tend to look
like in the U.S., though I think in some other parts of the world, postal codes can be alphanumeric,
meaning they can have alphabet letters mixed with numbers as well.
And so far, car would just safely cover all of those scenarios.
And now maybe I don't need it to be 255 characters in length for this.
Maybe we can safely do 50.
All right.
And then we need to cover county and region also.
So I'm going to just add those two fields county as of our car 255 and region as a VAR car 255.
And then finally, I'm also going to go ahead and allow us to specify the country.
As a bar car, maybe 100.
All right, and then a closing parentheses there to close that off.
OK.
And so now we're ready to create this table.
So I'm just going to do a controlled return.
OK.
And then I can just check real quick that that got created safely, so I'll do a select everything from
addresses and run that.
And there we go.
So we've got an I.D. street address address to city state postal code at country region, all of these
things.
So that all looks pretty good and we can come over here to the objects and drill back into the database
itself, public table.
And now we see an addresses table here.
And if we look at this tab for primary key, we see that we do have one record here for a primary key.
And it is on the ID column, right?
So that got created properly, and then if we come over here to the indexes, we see that we do in fact
have one row for an index that got created for us.
Now we didn't have to go in and explicitly create the index like we did for the people table because
we specified that the ID column is a primary key column and you get an index for three when you designate
a column as a primary key column.
And so here's that and this is specifying that the index is for the ID column.
So that's all looking very good.
All right.
So let's jump back over to the school table now.
One more thing I want to do before we close out this lesson, where we've mainly just focused on creating
the address table.
I want to show you now that one of the amazing things that we can do with a relational database is actually
relate data in the relational database.
That's why it's called a relational database, and you haven't really had a chance to see that part
of what these databases can do yet.
So now that we've got a people table and we've got an addresses table, we can establish a relationship
between these tables because the whole point is going to be that as we have these people in the table,
these people live at various places so we can actually have a column in the people table that essentially
points to addresses in the address table.
That is to say, so-and-so lives at this address, right?
And we can marry any two or more records together with these relationships.
So let me show you how we can do that.
So first, let me just query for from the People Table.
And I don't want to select everything from there.
So we'll specify something like first ten rows only.
OK.
So I just wanted to get a quick reminder of the columns that are currently in this table.
So what I'm thinking is we can add an additional column to this table and call it something like primary
address.
OK.
But that column will only hold a number, and that number will be the primary key or the idea of an
address.
OK.
So in other words, that number in here will point to an address in the addresses table.
And this is one of the ways that we can use a relational database to relate data from one table to another.
OK.
So the way we can do this is we can alter table people.
And actually, why don't I show you exactly how I would learn how to do this, just like we did for
the creation of the address table?
So let me open back up the web browser.
OK, so here we are back in the web browser again, and I will go back to the commands and now I'm doing
an altar table.
And we are going to add so altar, table, add altar, table, table name, add column, altar, table,
table name, which is people add column and let's call this column primary address.
So column and then on the next bit here, that's where we can specify the name of the column, which
is right here, column name and then a column definition.
So our options for column definition will be a data type again.
Now, because this column is going to be pointing to the I-D column of the Addresses column, this column
here only needs to be a data type that can hold a large amount of numbers, right?
In fact, it's basically the same thing as an ID column because it's the IDs from the addresses that
it's going to hold anyway.
So a safe bet for a data type to use here would be a big event, just as we used for the ID columns
on both the people table and the addresses table itself.
All right.
So a big hint, and I can tell you now we can skip over all this other stuff.
However, this last bit here column constraint definition.
We do want to take a look at that.
All right.
So now here we won't be making this column a primary key, but there is another option that we could
specify, which is this references specification.
And if we click on that, what we can do here is we can tell the database that this column is going
to refer to another column somewhere else.
And this is where we're really setting up this relationship between one table and another, or at least
specifically between one column and another column.
So here we can specify that this new primary address column will be referencing, or it references the
address tables ID column.
OK, so that's what we want to specify here and so we can type in this references keyword here references.
Then we need the table name, which in this case is addresses, then a parentheses and then the name
of a column that this should point to or reference.
Parentheses, I.D. And then I can close it off like that with a closing parentheses.
And that's what we need here.
Now the reason for doing this, this is actually optional, but by doing it, the database can help
us to maintain what is called referential integrity.
And that basically just means that if we choose to specify a value in the primary address column, the
database will make sure that that value that we specify there is a legitimate ID of an actual address
in the database.
The database will also ensure that we cannot accidentally delete an address if that address is being
used by a person.
It will give us a warning and actually it won't even allow us to do it.
We'd have to do a little extra work if we wanted to be able to delete an address that's being utilized
or or or referenced or referred to by a person.
OK, so those are some of the things that we get for free when we specify these relationships explicitly,
as we're doing here.
All right, so let's go ahead and execute this.
Now, notice this actually is taking a few seconds to execute because we are in effect modifying in
some ways every single row.
All five million and 11 rows of the people table.
All right.
All right, and let's just take a quick look here, so that actually took 46 seconds on my computer,
so that may take even longer for some of you have got a pretty fast computer that I'm running on right
now.
OK.
And so now if we come back over here and execute this query to just look at the first 10 rows of the
people table, we now see that we've got an additional primary address column, which is currently null,
which makes sense because we haven't actually put any data in there, but it's ready to go if and when
we want to.
And now let me even show you here that I can't just insert any random thing in here because of the referential
integrity, constraints and things.
So if I try to update the people table and set primary and dress equal to 1000, which is a record that
does not exist currently in the address table where ID equals and I'm just going to pick somebody equals
one.
OK?
So in other words, we are going to tell the database to update the first rose primary address to be
1000.
OK, so let's try that and see what happens.
We get a referential integrity constraint violation.
And so it's just doing what I said it would do, which is it's saying you can't refer to an Address
1000 because there is no address 1000.
So I'm not going to let you do that.
That's what this is saying and that is expected and quite frequently in many databases.
That is desirable functionality, in fact.
All right.
And then let's also go back over here to the Objects tab, and I'm going to right click on addresses
to refresh it.
OK.
And so now one more thing I want to look at here is the Exported Keys tab.
Now, although we didn't look at it explicitly before, I can tell you that right after we created this
address, this table initially, if I had clicked on this exported keys tab, there wouldn't have been
anything there.
Let's see if we have anything there now.
Yes, we do.
So we have one row in here, and so let me expand out a few of these columns and explain what we're
seeing here, if it's not obvious.
OK.
So what we're seeing here is that now that we have added that constraint between the people tables primary
address column and the ID column of the Addresses column, the database has further made note of these
relationships.
And so this is telling us that not only do we have a relationship now between these two tables, but
the address tables idea column is said to be exported out to the people tables primary address column.
OK.
In other words, values that exist in the people tables primary address field should be values that
are coming from the address tables ID column.
OK, so we're just restating things from from different perspectives.
From the perspective of the address table, its ID column is exported out to the People Tables primary
address column.
And then if we come down here and click on People Table, there are no exported keys here, but there
is one imported key.
OK, so this is just showing the relationship from both sides of these tables.
Another way of describing this type of relationship is to say we now have a foreign key.
The people tables primary address, column or field has a foreign key, pointing to the address tables
ID column.
OK, so you've got a foreign key and there's a constraint there.
So in fact, you'll often hear or see even databases refer to something called a foreign key constraint.
So again, that foreign key constraint just means that you can't just willy nilly put any value into
the people tables.
Primary address column.
The values that you can put in there are constrained by legitimate IDs of the addresses table.
All right, so I think that's enough of this.
In the next lesson, we will go back into the Java side of the world and we will model this address
concept there, and then we will marry these two things up.
OK.
So that's what we're going to do in the next one.
See you then.